# Summary
Cesar, an enslaved child of African descent, walked to the back room of a boat he labored on and threw a bag belonging to a sailor into the river. A Jesuit chaplain witnessed Cesar’s act and recorded the event. 

[Transcription](#transcription-(French,-diplomatic))  
[Translation](#translation-(English,-modern))  
[Notes](#notes) 

## Transcription (French, diplomatic)
**[feuille 1 recto] [digital 2]**
**(11275.)**

je soussigné declare qu’en ma presence, Cesar
negrillon de feu Mr. de Coustillas, a fait tomber
a L’eau dans le fleuve sur la Route, un sac dans
Lequel etoit des chemises et des hardes apartenant
au n<sup>[omm]é</sup> Simar patroni qui les avoit deposées sur la
chambre de derriere de son bateau: en foy de quoi
jai delivré au dit Simar le Present Certificat pour
lui Servir aux fins que de raison: au fort de l’entrepos 
dans la Riviere S<sup>t</sup>. francois ce 14. fev. 1739

[Signé:] Vitry jesuite 


**[f. 1 verso] [dig. 3]**
**(11276.)**

6 chemises a 5<sup>#</sup> [livres] … 30<sup>#</sup> [livres] 
1 paire culotte de drap ..… 10
1 paire bas de ….. 5
                                   45<sup>#</sup> [livres]

Vu le present certificat que M Salmon
ma renvoye [pour que] je requiere pour le roy et [pour] obtenir
que led[it] Simar soit payé de la succession de la 
de la somme de quarante cinq livres pour la valeur
des hardes par luy perdues a leffet de quoy il 
mettra son opposition pour y etre fait
droit a la N<sup>[ouve]lle</sup> orleans le six<sup>[ièm]e</sup> mars 1739

[Signé:] fleuriau 

## Translation (English, modern)
**[page # 1] [digital 2]**
**(11275.)**

I the undersigned declare that in my presence, Cesar,
*négrillon* of the late Mr De Coustillas, has dropped
in the water of the river on the way a bag in
which there were shirts and clothes belonging
to the named Simar patron[^i] who had deposited them in the
back room of the boat: in witness whereof, 
I delivered to the said Simar the present statement to serve him for all intents and purposes: at the fort of the warehouse
in the St. Francis River[^ii] this February 14th, 1739

[Signed:] [Pierre] Vitry, Jesuit[^iii]  

**[p. # 2] [dig. 3]**
**(11276.)** 

6 shirts at 5 *livres*… 30 *livres*
1 pair of wool breeches... 10
1 pair of stockings of … 5
                                   … 45 *livres*

seeing the present certificate that Mr. Salmon
sent me back [in order] for me to request the King [in order] to obtain
that the aforementioned Simar will be paid from the estate of the sum of forty five *livres* for the value
of the clothes lost by him, to the effect of what
he will put his opposition to be granted;
at New Orleans the 6th of march 1739

[Signed:] [François] Fleuriau 

## Notes

[^i]: When Mathurin Simar married Anne Vignode in New Orleans in 1725, the priest identified Simar as a sailor for the Company of the Indies. See July 24, 1725 in Saint Louis Cathedral Marriages, 1720-1730, Archives of the Archdiocese of New Orleans. By the time Cesar dumped Mathurin Simar(d)’s things into the river in 1739, Simar described himself as the “Patron des Bateaux du Roy.” When he returned to New Orleans after the war, Simard petitioned the estate of the recently deceased enslaver of Cesar, a man named Jacques de Coustillas. Simard demanded four hundred *livres* for the clothing that Cesar dumped into the river. To see that record, view manuscript page 11339 on March 2, 1739: https://lacolonialdocs.org/document/4041. 

[^ii]: France waged a second campaign against the Chickasaw Nation in 1739 after losing disastrously in battle in 1736. They built two forts, Fort St. Francis and Fort Assumption. Fort St. Francis was located where the St. Francis River met the Mississippi River in present day Arkansas. A few months later, they moved their forces to the Fourth Chickasaw Bluff, in present-day Memphis, Tennessee and named that site Fort Assumption. 

[^iii]: During this second campaign, Pierre Vitry kept a diary recording his daily experiences. Many of these entries note the presence of Africans and their descendents in the 1739 war campaign. For an English translation of this journal, see “Journal of Father Vitry of the Society of Jesus, Army Chaplain during the War Against the Chickasaw,” *Mid-America* 28, no. 1 (January 1946), 30-59.