# Summary  
[Julia Fortier, a free Black woman, files a freedom suit to compel the fair valuation of Medery, who is enslaved by Antoine Joseph Picquery, and successfully purchases his liberty. This case is an example of *coartación*, a process enslaved people and their kinfolk used to force their owners to provide them with an estimate of their value so they could fund their own self-purchase.]  
\
[Transcription](#transcription-(Spanish,-diplomatic))  
[Translation](#translation-(English,-modern))  
[Notes](#notes)  
\
## Transcription (Spanish, diplomatic)
[folio 0 recto] [digital #2]   
\
Año De_1793H    
\
Julia Fortier solicitando dar la
libertad a el Negro nombrado Mendery
esclabo de D<sup>n</sup> Juan Piquery por el
Precio De su estimación______   
\
 ~~N.<sup>o</sup>18~~ 
\
&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp; N.vv58
 \
[moderno, a lápiz] March 11, 1793 
[en lápiz de archivo rojo] 2999
\
Juez                                          
______________
VS<sup>or</sup> Gov.<sup>or</sup> }           S<sup>no</sup>
                                        __________
                                         Pedesclaux
\
\
[f.0 verso] [dig. #3]
\
[EN BLANCO]
\
\
[f.1 r] [dig. #4]
\
Julia Fortier Negra libre vecina de esta
ciudad en la mejor forma que haya lugar
en dřo ante V.S parezco y digo; que deseando 
rescatar dela Esclavitud en quese halla
el Negro Medery Esclavo de M.<sup>r</sup> Piquery
sup.<sup>co</sup> aV.S. sesirva mandar que el dhe su
Amo, nombre un Estimador de su parte, pa=
ra que con el que nombre que los es D.<sup>n</sup> Vicen 
te Fanguy, procedan a la Estimacion de 
dho Negro Medery Portanto_____ 
A V.S. Sup.<sup>co</sup> haverlo por nombrado proveer y mandar
como pido ConJusticia costas
Juro noes de malicia &a___  
\
                Por Julia Fortier
[Firmado:] Felipe Guinault  
\
\ 
Por presentada: y à tento à ser
para el fin que se propone de la
                ~  
\
\
[f.1 v] [dig. #5]  
\
Libertad del Negro Medery, escla
vo de M.<sup>r</sup> Piquery, la Estima-
cion que se solicita de la persona
de aquel, procedase desde luego à
ella; para la qual seha por nom-
brada por estaparte de Aprecia-
dor à d.<sup>n</sup> Vicente Fanguy à quien
sehara saber para su acceptacion,
Y Juramento que se comete, dandose
noticia de esta Providencia al Amo
del Esclavo, paraq<sup>e</sup> dentro de segundo
dia nombre otro Perito de su satis-
faccion con apercebimiento que des
no verificando, sehara de oficio. ___
[Rubrica, Carondelet]    [Rubrica, Vidal]
\
Proveyolo el S.<sup>r</sup> Baron de Carondelet
Caballero Dela religion de S.<sup>n</sup> Juan
Coronel Delos E.<sup>s</sup> extos, Governador
eYntendente Grãl vice Patrono Real
                     ~ 
\
\
[f.2 r] [dig. #6]
\
ellas Prov.<sup>~</sup> dela Luisiana, y Florida
Occidental eYnspector delas tropas
veteranas, y milicias De estas por
S.M. Con dictamen del S.<sup>r</sup> D. D. Nicolas
Maria Vidal teniente Governador
yAuditor de Grrã De esta dha Prov.<sup>a</sup>
yAsesor gràl del Governo De esta por
S.M. y lo rubricanas enla cuidad dela
Nueba Orleans a onze de Marso
De mil setecientos, noventa, y tres años=
[Firmado:] Pedro Pedesclaux
                            [Rubrica, Pedesclaux]
                E<sup>snoPub.</sup><sup>co</sup>  
\
\
Nf   En dho dia lo hace saber a Julia Fortier
       Negra libre doy fee___________
[Firmado:] Pedesclaux
                            [Rubrica, Pedesclaux]
                E<sup>sno</sup>
\
Diligencia } Enelmismodia yoel S.<sup>no</sup> lo hace por
             D.<sup>n</sup> Josef Coupery, y seme informo hacia
             su rendencia enel cargo, para que
             conne lo porpo por diligencia, doy feé==
    [Firmado:] Pedesclaux   [Rubrica, Pedesclaux]
                        E<sup>sno</sup>
\
N.Acep.<sup>n</sup> } Enelmismodia mes,y año yoel S.<sup>no</sup>
y Juram<sup>to</sup> }                         ~          
\ 
\
\
[f.2 v] [dig. #7]
\
hice saber a D.<sup>n</sup> Vincente Fanguy el
nombramiento de estimador que
por el decreto que antecedo sele hase,
quien acepto, y Juro por Dios y un a
cruz segun drõ Deproceder bien
y fielmente en el encargo que sele
hase, y lo firmo, doy fee________
[Firmado:] V=<sup>te</sup> Fangui
                            Antemi
          [Firmado:] Pedro Pedesclaux  
                E<sup>nopub.</sup><sup>co</sup>     [Rubrica, Pedesclaux]
\
\
[f.3 r] [dig. #8]
\
Julia Fortier negra libre vecina de esta 
Ciudad en los autos q<sup>e</sup> sigo contra Don Jph
Piquery sobre conseguir la libertad del negro__
Mederie su esclavo por el precio de su justa ta-
sacion ante VS digo q<sup>e</sup> sele ha mandado al antedho 
nombrase tasador de su parte y en atencion a__
venidir al campo a una legua de esta Ciudad del 
otro lado del rio, VS se ha de servir mandar dela
libre boleta De comparendo cometida su intimacion 
a qualquier persona habil por tanto
AVS Suplico se sirva proveer y mandar
como pido con Justicia costas juro y para 
ello &
                 Por Julia Fortier 
[Firmado:] Felipe Guinault 
\
\
\
Como lo pide
[Rubrica, Carondelet]    [Rubrica, Vidal]
\
Proveida elefor Baron de Carondelet
Cav.<sup>ro</sup> de San Juan Coronel de
los reales Extos_____  
\
\
[f.3 v] [dig. #9]                                 
\
Gov.<sup>Int.</sup><sup>e</sup> grãl, y Vice Patrono
Y<sup>e~al</sup> en las Pro.<sup>dela</sup> Luisiana
Con dictamen del S<sup>or</sup> d.d, Nicolas
M<sup>a</sup> VidalTh.<sup>e</sup> Gov.<sup>or</sup> Auditor de
grra
y Asesor grãl del Gov.<sup>o</sup> ylo ru-
bricasonenlaN<sup>a</sup> Orleans
à TreZe de MarZodemil
Set.<sup>s</sup> nuvento ytres
[Firmado:] Pedro Pedesclaux
               E<sup>snopub.</sup><sup>co</sup> [Rubrica, Pedesclaux]
\
\
N.<sup>n</sup> En dho dia lohis Saver àJulia
Fortier doy fe_____
[Firmado:] Pedesclaux  [Rubrica, Pedesclaux]
                  E<sup>nopub.</sup><sup>co</sup>
\
Nota,, Fue en el mismo dia se libro 
la boleta q<sup>e</sup> se mando ylo
entreguè ala parte doy
Fe__________________-
[Firmado:] Pedesclaux [Rubrica, Pedesclaux]
                  E.<sup>sno</sup>                                    
\
\
[f.3 r] [dig. #10]
\
[EN BLANCO]                                                             
\
## Translation (English, modern)
\
[page #1] [digital #]
\
[In the] Year of 1793H
\
Julia Fortier requesting the
freedom of the _negro_ named Mendery,
slave of _Don_ Juan Piquery, for the
price of his estimation. 
\
 ~~N.<sup>o</sup>18~~ 
\
 N.vv58
\
[modern, in pencil] March 11, 1793 
[in archival red pencil] 2999
\
Judge
______________
Your Lord Governor}   Notary
                                        __________
                                         Pedesclaux
\
\
[f.0 verse] [dig. #3]
\
[BLANK]
\
\
[p. #2] [dig. #4]
Julia Fortier, free *negra*, resident of this
city, in the way which is necessary
by law before Your Lordship I appear and say; that 
wishing 
to rescue from the slavery in which 
the *negro* Medery, slave of Mr. Piquery, is kept, 
I beg Your Lordship to order that of his said
master, to appoint an estimator on his behalf, so
that, with which the named, *Don* Vicente
Fanguy, they may proceed to the estimation of
the said *negro* Medery. Thusly_____ 
I beg Your Lordship to appoint, provide and
order as I ask, with due justice
I swear [that I have] no malice, etc.___                  
\
               For Julia Fortier
[Signed:] Felipe Guinault                                 
\
Motion filed: and support given
for the purpose proposed of the
  ~                                                        
\
\
[p. #3] [dig. #5]  
\
liberty of the *negro* Medery, slave
of Mr. Piquery, the estima-
tion requested from the person
of that which to proceed immediately 
to it; for which has been appointed 
by this party for appraiser 
*Don* Vicente Fanguy who will
be notified for his acceptance, 
and oath [to which] he submits, giving 
notice of this providence to the master 
of the slave, so that within the second
day he may appoint another expert to his
satisfaction, with the warning that if this
is not done, it will be executed *ex officio.*___
[Rubric, Carondelet]    [Rubric, Vidal]
\
Thus ordered by the Lord Baron de Carondelet,
Knight of the Holy Order of St. John, 
Colonel of these Realms, Governor and
Intendant-General, Vice Royal Patron
                     ~                                          
\
\
[p. #4] [dig. #6]  
\
of this Province of Louisiana and West
Florida and superintendent of veteran
troops and our militias for 
His Majesty, with assent of of Lord Director
*Don* Nicolas 
Maria Vidal, Lieutenant Governor
and Auditor of War of this said Province,
and Assessor-General of our Government for
His Majesty. And they signed in the City of 
New Orleans on [the] 11th of March
of the year seventeen hundred ninety three.
[Signed:] Pedro Pedesclaux
                            [Rubric, Pedesclaux]
                Notary Public                                
\
\
On the said day I made known to Julia Fortier,
*negra libre*,  I attest ___________
[Signed:] Pedro Pedesclaux
                            [Rubric, Pedesclaux]
             Notary                                          
\
Proceedings } On the same day, month, and year I,    
           the notary, have made [it known] to
          *Don* Joseph Coupery, and have been
          informed he has dispensed of his charge, so 
          with that it is done by due process. I  attest,                  
        [Signed:] Pedesclaux     [Rubric, Pedesclaux]
                       Notary
\
Notarized, accepted} on the same day, month 
and ordered             } and year, I, the notary 
                                    ~  
\
[p. #5] [dig. #7]
\
made known to *Don* Vicente Fanguy the
appointment as estimator that
is made to him by the above decree, 
who accepted and swore by God and the 
Cross, according to the law to proceed well and 
faithfully in the task that is made 
to him. I sign as such, I attest________
[Signed:] Vicente Fanguy
                      Before me
            [Signed:] Pedro Pedesclaux                       
                    Notary Public    [Rubric, Pedesclaux]    
\
\
[p. #6] [dig. #8]  
\
Julia Fortier, *negra libre*, resident of this
city, in the proceedings that I began against *Don* 
Joseph  
Piquery about achieving the freedom of the *negro*
Medery, his slave, for the price of his fair 
valuation, before Your Lordship, has sent the 
aforementioned
named evaluator on his behalf and in consideration
of coming from the countryside one league from 
this city on the  
other side of the river, Your Lordship order served 
freedom papers with subpoena, given charge
to any able person. Thusly.
To Your Lordship, I beg you to provide and order
as I request, with due justice, costs, and by which I
 swear it, etc.
                     For Julia Fortier 
       [Signed:] Felipe Guinault  
\
\
As requested.
[Rubric, Carondelet]    [Rubric, Vidal]  
\
Thus ordered by the Lord Baron de Carondelet 
Knight of the Holy Order of St. John, Colonel of
these Realms, 
\
\
[p. #6] [dig. #9]  
\
Governor Vice-Patron and Intendant-General of
this Province of Louisiana
with assent of Lord Director *Don* Nicolas 
Maria Vidal, Lieutenant Governor, Auditor
of War, and Assessor-General of the Government,
which they sign inNew Orleans 
on the thirteenth of March of seventeen
hundred and ninety three
 [Signed] Pedro Pedesclaux
               Notary Public     [Rubric, Pedesclaux]  
\
\
Notarized. On the said day I made known to Julia
Fortier. I attest, 
[Signed:] Pedesclaux      [Rubric, Pedesclaux]
               Notary Public    
\
Note: It was on the same day that the papers were 
issued and sent, and I 
delivered them to the party. I 
attest, 
[Signed:] Pedesclaux [Rubric, Pedesclaux]
                 Notary  
\
\
[p. #7] [dig. #10]
\
[BLANK]
\  























